docs/CIP/CIP-XXXX/messages/client/subscribe.md, before:

# Client Subscribe Message

Sent by client to server right after establishing a connection. New clients must authenticate themselves when subscribing to any blockchain events via a signature.

## Schema

```json
{
  "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "type": {
      "type": "string",
      "enum": ["subscribe"]
    },
    "topic": {
      "type": "array",
      "items": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
          "blockchain": {
            "type": "object",
            "properties": {
              "name": {
                "type": "string"
              },
              "network": {
                "type": "string"
              }
            },
            "required": ["name", "network"]
          },
          "signature": {
            "type": "string",
            "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
          },
          /* <blockchain specific grouped fields> */
          "cardano": {
            "type": "object",
            "properties": {
              "credentials": {
                "type": "object",
                "properties": {
                  "payment": {
                    "type": "array",
                    "items": {
                      "type": "string",
                      "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
                    }
                  },
                  "stake": {
                    "type": "array",
                    "items": {
                      "type": "string",
                      "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
                    }
                  }
                },
                "required": ["payment", "stake"]
              },
              "points": {
                "type": "array",
                "properties": {
                  "slot": {
                    "type": "integer",
                    "minimum": 0
                  },
                  "hash": {
                    "type": "string",
                    "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
                  }
                },
                "required": ["slot", "hash"]
              },
              "extensions": {
                "type": "array",
                "items": {
                  "type": "object",
                  "properties": {
                    "name": {
                      "type": "string"
                    },
                    "config": {},
                    "version": {
                      "type": "string"
                    }
                  },
                  "required": ["name", "config", "version"]
                }
              }
            },
            "required": ["credentials", "extensions", "points"]
          }
        },
        "required": ["blockchain", "signature"]
      }
    },
    "timestamp": {
      "type": "string",
      "format": "date-time"
    }
  },
  "required": ["type", "topic", "timestamp"],
  "additionalProperties": false
}
```

The `signature` field is generated by signing a SHA256 HMAC hashed string. The prehash string is constructed by concatenating the subscribed `blockchain` + `timestamp`.

> [!NOTE]
> For subscribing to multiple blockchains, the prehash string must be generated for each as `<blockchain.name>.<blockchain.network>`, for example:
> `cardano.mainnet+2024-06-27T12:34:56Z`.

Apply a SHA256 HMAC using either the payment signing key or staking signing key, and then base64-encode it as final payload within the initial message. Pass the output of this SHA256 HMAC to the signature field.

The signature verifies ownership of the private key, whose corresponding public key is used to filter relevant block transactions.

## Subscribe Example

```json
{
  "type": "subscribe",
  "topic": {
    "blockchain": { "name": "cardano", "network": "mainnet" },
    "signature": "OGNiOWIyNGVjOTMxZmY3N2MzYjQxOTY3OWE0YTcwMzczZmVkZmIxNDZmMDE0ODk0Nzg4YjUxMmIzMjE4MDdiYw==", // base64, SHA256 HMAC with your signing key
    "cardano": {
      "credentials": {
        "payment": [ "0d166978f407505f157c9f56fdb3358e60d1589295b2f7a1e66c1574" ],
        "stake": [ "82c00414a674fd7e7657aa5634e2086910c2f210e87f22ce880a0063" ]
      },
      "points": [
        {
          "slot": 66268628,
          "hash": "47b8ec3a58a4a69cb5e3397c36cb3966913882fa8179cae10a5d3f9319c4ae66"
        },
        {
          "slot": 87868775,
          "hash": "074985b22edc01b9579a2e571dc125e044aecf812ee45d50e6fb6fef979fd0d0"
        }
      ],
      "extensions": [
        {
          "name": "resolveTxInput",
          "config": true,
          "version": "1.0"
        },
        {
          "name": "assetMetadata",
          "config": false,
          "version": "1.0"
        }
      ]
    }
  },
  "timestamp": "2024-06-27T12:34:56Z"
}
```

## Subscription Extensions

Extensions are a way for clients to define if the server shall enable/disable some features like enriching data that it publishes. When serving data on-chain it may reference off-chain data or past on-chain data
which is more complex to track. To simplify the client-side consumption of such events, the server can aggregate or pull data from other datasources to enrich the
events it serves to clients at their discretion. To switch extensions on/off, the client provides an array of choices.
Setting extension's config value to `false` will switch it off if the extension is on by default.

### Resolving transaction inputs

For UTxO blockchains like Bitcoin or Cardano, transaction inputs have the following structure:

```json
{
  "outputIndex": {
    "type": "number"
  },
  "txHash": {
    "type": "string"
  }
}
```

When setting the `resolveTxInput` extension config to `true`, the server will include the transaction input address that was spent.

### Asset Metadata

[!TODO]

## Subscription Object

The subscription object is blockchain specific, because there are different networks, credentials or other fields required.
Chain specific fields are grouped under a specific field named after the given chain.
In the case of Cardano blockchain, all the relevant fields are placed under a field named `cardano`.
Below we list the currently supported subscriptions:

### Cardano

This is the format for a Cardano specific object in the `topic` object. A client can subscribe to multiple topics one
after another at any given time. A client can subscribe to multiple accounts by providing multiple credentials in the
`credentials` array.
The client can provide multiple starting `points` in the mandatory `points` array.
The first valid point provided in the array will be used as the starting point. If all the points are invalid, the
subscription will fail.
In case of an empty array, starting point will be the genesis.

```json
{
  "blockchain": {
    "name": "cardano",
    "network": {
      "type": "string",
      "enum": ["mainnet", "preprod", "preview"]
    }
  },
  "signature": {
    "type": "string",
    "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
  },
  "cardano": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "credentials": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
          "payment": {
            "type": "array",
            "items": {
              "type": "string",
              "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
            }
          },
          "stake": {
            "type": "array",
            "items": {
              "type": "string",
              "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
            }
          }
        },
        "required": ["payment", "stake"]
      },
      "points": {
        "type": "array",
        "properties": {
          "slot": {
            "type": "integer",
            "minimum": 0
          },
          "hash": {
            "type": "string",
            "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
          }
        },
        "required": ["slot", "hash"]
      },
      "extensions": {
        "type": "array",
        "items": {
          "type": "object",
          "properties": {
            "name": {
              "type": "string"
            },
            "config": {},
            "version": {
              "type": "string"
            }
          },
          "required": ["name", "config", "version"]
        }
      }
    },
    "required": ["credentials", "points", "extensions"]
  },
  "required": ["blockchain", "signature", "cardano"]
}
```

### Other blockchains

Any other blockchain schema should follow the same structure as the above Cardano example by applying these:

- Group blockchain specific properties under one property named after the blockchain (see `cardano` field)
- Keep chain specific authentication fields under `credentials` property
- Keep chain specific configuration and extensions under `extensions` property
- Keep chain specific starting point fields in `points` array. If not supporting multiple points, use a `point` object.
- Define a JSON Schema in the documentation

Commit message:

docs: generalize CIP for clients other than wallets to showcase feasability

docs/CIP/CIP-XXXX/messages/client/subscribe.md, after:

# Client Subscribe Message

Sent by client to server right after establishing a connection. New clients must authenticate themselves when subscribing to any blockchain events via a signature.

## Schema

```json
{
  "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "type": {
      "type": "string",
      "enum": ["subscribe"]
    },
    "topic": {
      "type": "array",
      "items": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
          "blockchain": {
            "type": "object",
            "properties": {
              "name": {
                "type": "string"
              },
              "network": {
                "type": "string"
              }
            },
            "required": ["name", "network"]
          },
          "signature": {
            "type": "string",
            "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
          },
          /* <blockchain specific grouped fields> */
          "cardano": {
            "type": "object",
            "properties": {
              "credentials": {
                "type": "object",
                "properties": {
                  "payment": {
                    "type": "array",
                    "items": {
                      "type": "string",
                      "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
                    }
                  },
                  "stake": {
                    "type": "array",
                    "items": {
                      "type": "string",
                      "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
                    }
                  }
                },
                "required": ["payment", "stake"]
              },
              "points": {
                "type": "array",
                "properties": {
                  "slot": {
                    "type": "integer",
                    "minimum": 0
                  },
                  "hash": {
                    "type": "string",
                    "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
                  }
                },
                "required": ["slot", "hash"]
              },
              "extensions": {
                "type": "array",
                "items": {
                  "type": "object",
                  "properties": {
                    "name": {
                      "type": "string"
                    },
                    "config": {},
                    "version": {
                      "type": "string"
                    }
                  },
                  "required": ["name", "config", "version"]
                }
              }
            },
            "required": ["credentials", "extensions", "points"]
          }
        },
        "required": ["blockchain", "signature"]
      }
    },
    "timestamp": {
      "type": "string",
      "format": "date-time"
    }
  },
  "required": ["type", "topic", "timestamp"],
  "additionalProperties": false
}
```

The `signature` field is generated by signing a SHA256 HMAC hashed string. The prehash string is constructed by concatenating the subscribed `blockchain` + `timestamp`.

> [!NOTE]
> For subscribing to multiple blockchains, the prehash string must be generated for each as `<blockchain.name>.<blockchain.network>`, for example:
> `cardano.mainnet+2024-06-27T12:34:56Z`.

Apply a SHA256 HMAC using either the payment signing key or staking signing key, and then base64-encode it as final payload within the initial message. Pass the output of this SHA256 HMAC to the signature field.

The signature verifies ownership of the private key, whose corresponding public key is used to filter relevant block transactions.

> [!NOTE]
> This way of verifying connecting clients works well for wallet uses cases, not for dApps. As dApps cannot sign with a private key since their script address consists of a hash of the script itself. Alternatively, dApps may whitelist connecting clients if the API is exclusive or ask for an API key that is only known for paying clients/ clients with a dedicated account to avoid spam or misuse of third parties.

## Subscribe Example

```json
{
  "type": "subscribe",
  "topic": {
    "blockchain": { "name": "cardano", "network": "mainnet" },
    "signature": "OGNiOWIyNGVjOTMxZmY3N2MzYjQxOTY3OWE0YTcwMzczZmVkZmIxNDZmMDE0ODk0Nzg4YjUxMmIzMjE4MDdiYw==", // base64, SHA256 HMAC with your signing key
    "cardano": {
      "credentials": {
        "payment": [ "0d166978f407505f157c9f56fdb3358e60d1589295b2f7a1e66c1574" ],
        "stake": [ "82c00414a674fd7e7657aa5634e2086910c2f210e87f22ce880a0063" ]
      },
      "points": [
        {
          "slot": 66268628,
          "hash": "47b8ec3a58a4a69cb5e3397c36cb3966913882fa8179cae10a5d3f9319c4ae66"
        },
        {
          "slot": 87868775,
          "hash": "074985b22edc01b9579a2e571dc125e044aecf812ee45d50e6fb6fef979fd0d0"
        }
      ],
      "extensions": [
        {
          "name": "resolveTxInput",
          "config": true,
          "version": "1.0"
        },
        {
          "name": "assetMetadata",
          "config": false,
          "version": "1.0"
        }
      ]
    }
  },
  "timestamp": "2024-06-27T12:34:56Z"
}
```

## Subscription Extensions

Extensions are a way for clients to define if the server shall enable/disable some features like enriching data that it publishes. When serving data on-chain it may reference off-chain data or past on-chain data
which is more complex to track. To simplify the client-side consumption of such events, the server can aggregate or pull data from other datasources to enrich the
events it serves to clients at their discretion. To switch extensions on/off, the client provides an array of choices.
Setting extension's config value to `false` will switch it off if the extension is on by default.

### Resolving transaction inputs

For UTxO blockchains like Bitcoin or Cardano, transaction inputs have the following structure:

```json
{
  "outputIndex": {
    "type": "number"
  },
  "txHash": {
    "type": "string"
  }
}
```

When setting the `resolveTxInput` extension config to `true`, the server will include the transaction input address that was spent.

### Asset Metadata

[!TODO]

## Subscription Object

The subscription object is blockchain specific, because there are different networks, credentials or other fields required.
Chain specific fields are grouped under a specific field named after the given chain.
In the case of Cardano blockchain, all the relevant fields are placed under a field named `cardano`.
Below we list the currently supported subscriptions:

### Cardano

This is the format for a Cardano specific object in the `topic` object. A client can subscribe to multiple topics one
after another at any given time. A client can subscribe to multiple accounts by providing multiple credentials in the
`credentials` array.
The client can provide multiple starting `points` in the mandatory `points` array.
The first valid point provided in the array will be used as the starting point. If all the points are invalid, the
subscription will fail.
In case of an empty array, starting point will be the genesis.

```json
{
  "blockchain": {
    "name": "cardano",
    "network": {
      "type": "string",
      "enum": ["mainnet", "preprod", "preview"]
    }
  },
  "signature": {
    "type": "string",
    "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
  },
  "cardano": {
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
      "credentials": {
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
          "payment": {
            "type": "array",
            "items": {
              "type": "string",
              "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
            }
          },
          "stake": {
            "type": "array",
            "items": {
              "type": "string",
              "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
            }
          }
        },
        "required": ["payment", "stake"]
      },
      "points": {
        "type": "array",
        "properties": {
          "slot": {
            "type": "integer",
            "minimum": 0
          },
          "hash": {
            "type": "string",
            "pattern": "^[A-Za-z0-9+/=]*$"
          }
        },
        "required": ["slot", "hash"]
      },
      "extensions": {
        "type": "array",
        "items": {
          "type": "object",
          "properties": {
            "name": {
              "type": "string"
            },
            "config": {},
            "version": {
              "type": "string"
            }
          },
          "required": ["name", "config", "version"]
        }
      }
    },
    "required": ["credentials", "points", "extensions"]
  },
  "required": ["blockchain", "signature", "cardano"]
}
```

### Other blockchains

Any other blockchain schema should follow the same structure as the above Cardano example by applying these:

- Group blockchain specific properties under one property named after the blockchain (see `cardano` field)
- Keep chain specific authentication fields under `credentials` property
- Keep chain specific configuration and extensions under `extensions` property
- Keep chain specific starting point fields in `points` array. If not supporting multiple points, use a `point` object.
- Define a JSON Schema in the documentation
